All variables must take on at least two different possible values (otherwise they would be a constant rather than a variable), but 
different values of the variable can relate to each other in different ways, which we refer to as scales of measurement. There are 
four ways in which the different values of a variable can differ.

Identity: Each value of the variable has a unique meaning.
Magnitude: The values of the variable reflect different magnitudes and have an ordered relationship to one another — that is, some values 
are larger and some are smaller.
Equal intervals: Units along the scale of measurement are equal to one another. This means, for example, that the difference 
between 1 and 2 would be equal in its magnitude to the difference between 19 and 20.
Zero is the minimum value: The scale has a true zero point, below which no values exist. For example, it’s not possible to for 
a person’s weight to be negative.

There are four different scales of measurement that go along with these different ways that values of a variable can differ.

Nominal scale. A nominal variable satisfies the criterion of identity, such that each value of the variable represents something different,
but the numbers simply serve as qualitative labels as discussed above. For example, we might ask people for their political party 
affiliation, and then code those as numbers: 1 = “Republican”, 2 = “Democrat”, 3 = “Libertarian”, and so on. However, the different 
numbers do not have any ordered relationship with one another.

Ordinal scale. An ordinal variable satisfies the criteria of identity and magnitude, such that the values can be ordered in terms of their
magnitude. For example, we might ask a person with chronic pain to complete a form every day assessing how bad their pain is, 
using a 1-7 numeric scale. Note that while the person is presumably feeling more pain on a day when they report a 6 versus a day 
when they report a 3, it wouldn’t make sense to say that their pain is twice as bad on the former versus the latter day; the ordering 
gives us information about relative magnitude, but the differences between values are not necessarily equal in magnitude.

Interval scale. An interval scale has all of the features of an ordinal scale, but in addition the intervals between units on the 
measurement scale can be treated as equal. A standard example is physical temperature measured in Celsius or Farenheit; the physical 
difference between 10 and 20 degrees is the same as the physical difference between 90 and 100 degrees, but each scale can also take on 
negative values.

Ratio scale. A ratio scale variable has all four of the features outlined above: identity, magnitude, equal intervals, and a minimum 
value of zero. The difference between a ratio scale variable and an interval scale variable is that the ratio scale variable has a true 
zero point. Examples of ratio scale variables include physical height and weight, along with temperature measured in Kelvin.
